First steps
Getting Started
Goal: go from zero to a first working chat with minimal setup.
Fastest chat: open the Control UI (no channel setup needed). Run openclaw dashboard and chat in the browser, or open http://127.0.0.1:18789/ on the gateway host. Docs: Dashboard and Control UI.
​
Prereqs
Node 22 or newer
Check your Node version with node --version if you are unsure.
​
Quick setup (CLI)
1
Install OpenClaw (recommended)

macOS/Linux
Windows (PowerShell)
curl -fsSL https://openclaw.ai/install.sh | bash
Install Script Process
Other install methods and requirements: Install.
2
Run the onboarding wizard

openclaw onboard --install-daemon
The wizard configures auth, gateway settings, and optional channels. See Onboarding Wizard for details.
3
Check the Gateway

If you installed the service, it should already be running:
openclaw gateway status
4
Open the Control UI

openclaw dashboard
If the Control UI loads, your Gateway is ready for use.
​
Optional checks and extras
Run the Gateway in the foreground

Send a test message

​
Useful environment variables
If you run OpenClaw as a service account or want custom config/state locations:
OPENCLAW_HOME sets the home directory used for internal path resolution.
OPENCLAW_STATE_DIR overrides the state directory.
OPENCLAW_CONFIG_PATH overrides the config file path.
Full environment variable reference: Environment vars.
​
Go deeper
Onboarding Wizard (details)
Full CLI wizard reference and advanced options.
macOS app onboarding
First run flow for the macOS app.
​
What you will have
A running Gateway
Auth configured
Control UI access or a connected channel
​
Next steps
DM safety and approvals: Pairing
Connect more channels: Channels
Advanced workflows and from source: Setup
Features
Onboarding Overview

First steps
Onboarding Overview
OpenClaw supports multiple onboarding paths depending on where the Gateway runs and how you prefer to configure providers.
​
Choose your onboarding path
CLI wizard for macOS, Linux, and Windows (via WSL2).
macOS app for a guided first run on Apple silicon or Intel Macs.
​
CLI onboarding wizard
Run the wizard in a terminal:
openclaw onboard
Use the CLI wizard when you want full control of the Gateway, workspace, channels, and skills. Docs:
Onboarding Wizard (CLI)
openclaw onboard command
​
macOS app onboarding
Use the OpenClaw app when you want a fully guided setup on macOS. Docs:
Onboarding (macOS App)
​
Custom Provider
If you need an endpoint that is not listed, including hosted providers that expose standard OpenAI or Anthropic APIs, choose Custom Provider in the CLI wizard. You will be asked to:
Pick OpenAI-compatible, Anthropic-compatible, or Unknown (auto-detect).
Enter a base URL and API key (if required by the provider).
Provide a model ID and optional alias.
Choose an Endpoint ID so multiple custom endpoints can coexist.
For detailed steps, follow the CLI onboarding docs above.
Getting Started
Onboarding: CLI

First steps
Onboarding Wizard (CLI)
The onboarding wizard is the recommended way to set up OpenClaw on macOS, Linux, or Windows (via WSL2; strongly recommended). It configures a local Gateway or a remote Gateway connection, plus channels, skills, and workspace defaults in one guided flow.
openclaw onboard
Fastest first chat: open the Control UI (no channel setup needed). Run openclaw dashboard and chat in the browser. Docs: Dashboard.
To reconfigure later:
openclaw configure
openclaw agents add <name>
--json does not imply non-interactive mode. For scripts, use --non-interactive.
Recommended: set up a Brave Search API key so the agent can use web_search (web_fetch works without a key). Easiest path: openclaw configure --section web which stores tools.web.search.apiKey. Docs: Web tools.
​
QuickStart vs Advanced
The wizard starts with QuickStart (defaults) vs Advanced (full control).
QuickStart (defaults)
Advanced (full control)
Local gateway (loopback)
Workspace default (or existing workspace)
Gateway port 18789
Gateway auth Token (auto‑generated, even on loopback)
Tailscale exposure Off
Telegram + WhatsApp DMs default to allowlist (you’ll be prompted for your phone number)
​
What the wizard configures
Local mode (default) walks you through these steps:
Model/Auth — Anthropic API key (recommended), OpenAI, or Custom Provider (OpenAI-compatible, Anthropic-compatible, or Unknown auto-detect). Pick a default model.
Workspace — Location for agent files (default ~/.openclaw/workspace). Seeds bootstrap files.
Gateway — Port, bind address, auth mode, Tailscale exposure.
Channels — WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord, Google Chat, Mattermost, Signal, BlueBubbles, or iMessage.
Daemon — Installs a LaunchAgent (macOS) or systemd user unit (Linux/WSL2).
Health check — Starts the Gateway and verifies it’s running.
Skills — Installs recommended skills and optional dependencies.
Re-running the wizard does not wipe anything unless you explicitly choose Reset (or pass --reset). If the config is invalid or contains legacy keys, the wizard asks you to run openclaw doctor first.
Remote mode only configures the local client to connect to a Gateway elsewhere. It does not install or change anything on the remote host.
​
Add another agent
Use openclaw agents add <name> to create a separate agent with its own workspace, sessions, and auth profiles. Running without --workspace launches the wizard.
What it sets:
agents.list[].name
agents.list[].workspace
agents.list[].agentDir
Notes:
Default workspaces follow ~/.openclaw/workspace-<agentId>.
Add bindings to route inbound messages (the wizard can do this).
Non-interactive flags: --model, --agent-dir, --bind, --non-interactive.
​
Full reference
For detailed step-by-step breakdowns, non-interactive scripting, Signal setup, RPC API, and a full list of config fields the wizard writes, see the Wizard Reference.
​
Related docs
CLI command reference: openclaw onboard
Onboarding overview: Onboarding Overview
macOS app onboarding: Onboarding
Agent first-run ritual: Agent Bootstrapping
Onboarding Overview
Onboarding: macOS App

OpenClaw
OpenClaw

“EXFOLIATE! EXFOLIATE!” — A space lobster, probably
Any OS gateway for AI agents across WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord, iMessage, and more.
Send a message, get an agent response from your pocket. Plugins add Mattermost and more.

Get Started
Install OpenClaw and bring up the Gateway in minutes.
Run the Wizard
Guided setup with openclaw onboard and pairing flows.
Open the Control UI
Launch the browser dashboard for chat, config, and sessions.
​
What is OpenClaw?
OpenClaw is a self-hosted gateway that connects your favorite chat apps — WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord, iMessage, and more — to AI coding agents like Pi. You run a single Gateway process on your own machine (or a server), and it becomes the bridge between your messaging apps and an always-available AI assistant.
Who is it for? Developers and power users who want a personal AI assistant they can message from anywhere — without giving up control of their data or relying on a hosted service.
What makes it different?
Self-hosted: runs on your hardware, your rules
Multi-channel: one Gateway serves WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord, and more simultaneously
Agent-native: built for coding agents with tool use, sessions, memory, and multi-agent routing
Open source: MIT licensed, community-driven
What do you need? Node 22+, an API key (Anthropic recommended), and 5 minutes.
​
How it works







Chat apps + plugins

Gateway

Pi agent

CLI

Web Control UI

macOS app

iOS and Android nodes

The Gateway is the single source of truth for sessions, routing, and channel connections.
​
Key capabilities
Multi-channel gateway
WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord, and iMessage with a single Gateway process.
Plugin channels
Add Mattermost and more with extension packages.
Multi-agent routing
Isolated sessions per agent, workspace, or sender.
Media support
Send and receive images, audio, and documents.
Web Control UI
Browser dashboard for chat, config, sessions, and nodes.
Mobile nodes
Pair iOS and Android nodes with Canvas support.
​
Quick start
1
Install OpenClaw

npm install -g openclaw@latest
2
Onboard and install the service

openclaw onboard --install-daemon
3
Pair WhatsApp and start the Gateway

openclaw channels login
openclaw gateway --port 18789
Need the full install and dev setup? See Quick start.
​
Dashboard
Open the browser Control UI after the Gateway starts.
Local default: http://127.0.0.1:18789/
Remote access: Web surfaces and Tailscale
OpenClaw

​
Configuration (optional)
Config lives at ~/.openclaw/openclaw.json.
If you do nothing, OpenClaw uses the bundled Pi binary in RPC mode with per-sender sessions.
If you want to lock it down, start with channels.whatsapp.allowFrom and (for groups) mention rules.
Example:
{
  channels: {
    whatsapp: {
      allowFrom: ["+15555550123"],
      groups: { "*": { requireMention: true } },
    },
  },
  messages: { groupChat: { mentionPatterns: ["@openclaw"] } },
}
​
Start here
Docs hubs
All docs and guides, organized by use case.
Configuration
Core Gateway settings, tokens, and provider config.
Remote access
SSH and tailnet access patterns.
Channels
Channel-specific setup for WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord, and more.
Nodes
iOS and Android nodes with pairing and Canvas.
Help
Common fixes and troubleshooting entry point.
​
Learn more
Full feature list
Complete channel, routing, and media capabilities.
Multi-agent routing
Workspace isolation and per-agent sessions.
Security
Tokens, allowlists, and safety controls.
Troubleshooting
Gateway diagnostics and common errors.
About and credits
Project origins, contributors, and license.
    